feat: Blogpost secure cloud foundation tooling (#753)
ordina-jworks/ordina-jworks.github.io: _posts/2023-02-16-secure-cloud-foundation.md

Reviewer: Try to resize the photos a little bit smaller. It's a good way to 'loosen' the seriousness, but the images really take over my whole screen sometimes. Try to reduce the size a bit. Play with it.

---
layout: post
authors: [lander_marien, duncan_casteleyn]
title: 'Secure cloud foundation tooling'
image: /img/2023-02-16-secure-cloud-foundation/header.png # TODO - change image
tags: [aws, cloud]
category: Cloud
comments: true
---

<!-- TODO complete index -->

> - [Introduction](#introduction)

Author: I also like it!

- [The Warden: Open Policy Agent](#the-warden-open-policy-agent)
- [The Janitor: Cloud Custodian](#the-janitor-cloud-custodian)
- [The Watchdog: Snyk](#the-watchdog-snyk)
- [The Container Detective: Trivy](#the-container-detective-trivy)
- [The Composer: Fugue](#the-composer-fugue)

# Introduction

> If you have ever come in to contact with an enterprise cloud environment,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you ever came in contact with an enterprise cloud environment,
```

> you know that keeping it secure and compliant can be a cumbersome task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you know that keeping it secure and compliant can be a challenging task.
```

> Many companies have their own security and compliance requirements,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every company has their own security and compliance requirements,
```

and they should at least follow a best practice standard like CIS AWS Foundations Benchmark.

> You'll find out that because access to the cloud is splintered over so many teams and projects,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Often, you'll find that because of the segmented responsibilities across many teams and projects, gaps exist in the security and compliancy posture of the organisation. 
```

> that there will be so many violations to the security and compliance requirements,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> that you can not keep up with all the changes in your enterprise cloud environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add to that the rate of change that companies need to handle to stay competitive and you end up with a puzzle that no-one can oversee. 
```

Not really happy with this sentence but it should be something like this.

> Originally when we started investigating solutions to scan your infrastructure as code and cloud environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Originally, we started investigating solutions to scan your infrastructure as code and cloud environment.
```

> We thought it would be short document for internal use only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We thought we'd look at a handful of tools, evaluate them and select a clear winner.
```

> We quickly discovered there are actually quite some interesting tools out their,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We quickly discovered there are quite some interesting tools out their,
```

some that are free and some that cost you a lot of money,

> and some that can not just do cloud, but much more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and some not only do cloud, but can do much more.
```

We'll be summarizing the tools we found and how they can help you to secure your cloud environment or other resources.
What they can do, what they can't do, what you can use them with and for.

## The Warden: Open Policy Agent

Cloud computing has made it easy for organizations to manage their IT infrastructure on a large scale. However, with the ease of cloud computing comes the challenge of securing the environment and preventing accidental misconfigurations. This is where Open Policy Agent (OPA) comes into play.

<img src="{{ '/img/2023-02-16-secure-cloud-foundation/warden.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Gandalf, You shall not pass" class="image fit" style="margin:0px auto; max-width:100%">

OPA is an open-source, general-purpose policy engine that can be used to enforce policies across various systems, including cloud infrastructure.

Some of OPA's strenghts summed up:

### Policy Management

> OPA provides a simple and flexible policy language used by writing [Rego](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.  that allows organizations to define and manage policies across multiple cloud platforms. Policies can be created to enforce security controls, compliancy, and cost optimization rules. The policies can be customized to meet specific operational needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OPA provides a simple and flexible policy language used by writing [Rego](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.  that allows organizations to define and manage policies across multiple cloud platforms. 
Policies can be created to enforce security controls, compliancy, and cost optimization rules. 
The policies can be customized to meet specific operational needs.
These policies are available as code and can be managed like any other code, including automated testing(?) in an organisation. 
```

### Automated Compliancy Enforcement

OPA automates policy enforcement by integrating with various cloud platforms, such as AWS, Azure, and GCP. Once policies are defined, OPA can automatically enforce them in real-time, reducing the need for manual intervention.

> ### Intergrations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Integrations
```

> OPA can integrate with various cloud native tools, including Kubernetes, Istio, and Envoy. This allows organizations to extend their policy management across various systems, making it easier to enforce policies across multiple platforms.

Reviewer 2: Add "broad ecosystem" "end-to-end compliance"

You also have data flow that shows you the entry point and method invocation of the vulnerability.
Which shows you the entire stack path to the vulnerability in your source code.

To solve the vulnerability you can read the details of the vulnerability and a best practice for prevention if
available.
There is also another tab that shows 3 open source projects that had the vulnerability and how they fixed it their code.

### Licence scanning

You can configure Snyk to scan your open source dependencies for licence issues with your dependencies,
which can be useful for example if your company wants to avoid using dependencies with a certain licence,
because they want to commercialize the software in the future.

### Container scanning

Snyk can scan your container images for vulnerabilities it can do this from docker images, Amazon ECR, Docker hub, ...
You can set this up in your Kubernetes cluster, but currently Fargate is not supported.

For scanning that is linked to a git repository you have the option
to create a pull request to update to a fixed image version.

### Infrastructure as code scanning

> Snyk can scan your infrastructure as code against the CIS AWS Foundations Benchmark or you can write custom policies.

Reviewer 2: What tools does it support? What kind of issues can it detect? How can you intergrate it (runs in CI/CD, agent that monitors the cloud?, ...)

### Cloud scanning

> Snyk also has cloud scanning, but this service is still in closed beta and is not available for everyone.

Author: Was not testable so I will remove it

We were not able to test this product, because it requires an enterprise licence at the time of writing.

### Custom policies

> Snyk allows you to write custom policies in Rego, but only for IaC scanning and platform policies.

Reviewer 2: Explain how this is different from OPA or how this is using OPA in the background?

## The Container Detective: Trivy

Trivy is an open-source cli tool provided by Aqua Security.

### Container scanning

> Trivy can scan container images against well known vulnerabilities.

Reviewer 2: Explain how this works (detects packages from package manager, scans knows vulnerability lists, finds information about remediations, ..)

On the [tool's homepage](https://trivy.dev/), you can enter public available docker hub images to test it out.

### Dependency scanning

> Trivy can scan your dependencies for well known vulnerabilities.

Reviewer 2: I'd assume this is dependencies as in programming language dependencies (E.g. maven?). Explain this, and provide an example

It has a mode that automatically discovers, declarations files for various package managers

### CI/CD integration

> Because Trivy is a cli tool it can easily be integrates in CI/CD pipelines.

Reviewer 2: Explain how you would integrate it and what information you expect it go give you. If you discuss github, show only 1 example of how it is used.

Trivy also maintains a [GitHub action](https://github.com/aquasecurity/trivy-action) to integrate it in GitHub actions.
But the community has created 2 additional GitHub actions.

### AWS integration

Trivy can be run locally to scan your AWS environment using the AWS cli.
The default included check scans against AWS CIS 1.2.0 benchmark.

> It shows summarizes a lists of issues, and gives description of how to resolve the issue, it won't automatically fix it.

Reviewer 2: How is this different from CIS 1.2.0 on AWS scanning (security hub)

Author: Besides this being free and Security hub costing some money not so much.

### Secret scanning

> Trivy can scan your code for secrets, it can scan for AWS access key, GCP service account, GitHub personal access token,

Reviewer 2: Cool! Explain why secrets in code are bad or make a joke on why everybody should know this :)

GitLab personal access token, Slack access token, etc.

It can do this either on the file system or inside a container image.

### Configuration issues

> Trivy can scan your configuration files like Dockerfiles, Kubernetes manifests, Terraform, CloudFormation, etc.

Reviewer 2: If the others are all just one-line explanations, make it a list instead of separate headers. 

So either add a bit more explanation on what it does, how it does it and why or move all of them to a simple list.

against known configuration issues

### Custom policies

> For all the mentioned functionality custom policies can be written in Rego.

Reviewer 2: again compare to OPA .

## The Composer: Fugue

> Fugue is a cloud security platform that helps you to secure your cloud environment,

Reviewer 2: What does this mean for the future of this? Will Snyk support it or will is disappear into snyk cloud?

Author: This is unclear and not mentioned anywhere 🦺

it was bought by Snyk some time ago and after this take-over Snyk started working on Snyk Cloud.

### Baseline enforcement

Fugue allows you to take a snapshot of your Cloud environment and use it as baseline.

This prevents anyone from making modifications to your environment that are not compliant with your baseline.

> It can't recreate or delete resources it only enforces by modifying them back to the original state of the snapshot.

Reviewer 2: So what does this "snapshot" include? Fixed pods? or fixed EC2s? How does this work with automated scaling for example?

### Policy scanning

Fugue allows you to write policies to scan your AWS environment for compliance,
or you can use one of the pre-defined policies like CIS AWS Foundations Benchmark.

It does not provide automatic solutions to fix the violations, but has descriptions on how to fix them.

### CI/CD integration

Fugue can be integrated with your CI/CD pipeline to scan your infrastructure as code for compliance using their cli.

They have a guide on how to set this up with CircleCI,
but it should be possible to set this up with any other CI/CD tools.

### Custom policies

Fugue allows you to write custom policies in Rego.

<!---
TO DO -- 

Add images for each section.

Enrich post with links

Check for spelling/grammar erros

Get banner image

> -->

Reviewer 2: Add a conclusion. 

It's clear that Rego is the compliance configuration language of choice for this type of tooling (it's used / supported by almost all of the ones you looked at). Explain what the difference is between the tools (use the references to the nicknames here as they seem to suggest what they can and cannot do). 

Include in the conclusion how these solutions compare to the native solutions of the cloud providers (AWS security hub, Azure security center / Sentinel)

Add a call to action to either look into one of the tools, follow the blog for more details looks at the tools in question or reach out to one of you (LinkedIn? or refer to Ordina, as you like). 

Add any interesting links, at least links to all of the websites of the tools / products mentioned.

tags: [aws, cloud]
category: Cloud
comments: true
---

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [The Warden: Open Policy Agent](#the-warden-open-policy-agent)
- [The Janitor: Cloud Custodian](#the-janitor-cloud-custodian)
- [The Watchdog: Snyk](#the-watchdog-snyk)
- [The Container Detective: Trivy](#the-container-detective-trivy)
- [The Composer: Fugue](#the-composer-fugue)

# Introduction

If you ever came in contact with an enterprise cloud environment,
you know that keeping it secure and compliant can be a challenging task.

Every company has their own security and compliance requirements,
and they should at least follow a best practice standard like CIS AWS Foundations Benchmark.

Often, you'll find that because of the segmented responsibilities across many teams and projects, gaps exist in the security and compliance posture of the organisation. 
Add to that the rate of change that companies need to handle to stay competitive and you end up with a puzzle that no-one can oversee. 

Originally, we started investigating solutions to scan your infrastructure as code and cloud environment.
We thought we'd look at a handful of tools, evaluate them and select a clear winner.

> We quickly discovered there are quite some interesting tools out their,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We quickly discovered there are quite some interesting tools out there.
Some that are free and some that cost you a lot of money,
```

some that are free and some that cost you a lot of money,
and some not only do cloud, but can do much more.

We'll be summarizing the tools we found and how they can help you to secure your cloud environment or other resources.
What they can do, what they can't do, what you can use them with and for.

## The Warden: Open Policy Agent

Cloud computing has made it easy for organizations to manage their IT infrastructure on a large scale. However, with the ease of cloud computing comes the challenge of securing the environment and preventing accidental misconfigurations. This is where [Open Policy Agent](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} (OPA) comes into play.

<img src="{{ '/img/2023-02-16-secure-cloud-foundation/warden.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Gandalf, You shall not pass" class="image fit" style="margin:0px auto; max-width:100%">

OPA is an open-source, general-purpose policy engine that can be used to enforce policies across various systems, including cloud infrastructure.

> Some of OPA's strenghts summed up:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of OPA's strengths summed up:
```

Reviewer: Actually, I would rewrite this sentence, the ':' is not that great. 
A suggestion:
'Lets look at some of the strengths and advantages that OPA has to offer.'

### Policy Management
OPA provides a simple and flexible policy language used by writing [Rego](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.  that allows organizations to define and manage policies across multiple cloud platforms. 
Policies can be created to enforce security controls, compliancy, and cost optimization rules. 
The policies can be customized to meet specific operational needs.
These policies are available as code and can be managed like any other code, including automated testing in an organisation. 

### Automated Compliancy Enforcement

> OPA can be integrated into the Cloud environment using various methods, such as by deploying it as a sidecar container in a Kubernetes cluster or by using Google Cloud functions, [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/easily-running-open-policy-agent-serverless-with-aws-lambda-and-amazon-api-gateway/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} or Azure Automation to run OPA policies. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OPA can be integrated into the cloud environment using various methods, such as by deploying it as a sidecar container in a Kubernetes cluster or by using Google Cloud functions, [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/easily-running-open-policy-agent-serverless-with-aws-lambda-and-amazon-api-gateway/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} or Azure Automation to run OPA policies. 
```
No need for caps here.

### Integrations

OPA can integrate with various cloud native tools, including Kubernetes, Istio, and Envoy. This allows organizations to extend their policy management across various systems, helps to ensure end-to-end compliance, making it easier to enforce policies across multiple platforms and cover broad ecosystems.

## The Janitor: Cloud Custodian

[Cloud Custodian](https://cloudcustodian.io/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} is an open-source tool that helps organizations manage their cloud infrastructure in a secure and compliant way. One of the key features of Cloud Custodian is its ability to scan cloud resources across multiple cloud platforms, including Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud Platform (GCP).

<img src="{{ '/img/2023-02-16-secure-cloud-foundation/janitor.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Gandalf, You shall not pass" class="image fit" style="margin:0px auto; max-width:100%; height:60%;">

Cloud Custodian uses a policy-driven approach to scan cloud resources. Policies are written using a simple and flexible policy language that allows organizations to define and manage policies.

> The features of Cloud Custodian for a secure cloud environment:

Reviewer: Same comment as on OPA.

Reviewer: Or try removing the sentence, see how you feel about it.

### Continuous Compliance

Cloud Custodian helps organizations maintain continuous compliance by ensuring that policies are enforced at all times. The tool can detect any changes in the cloud infrastructure that may violate the policies and take corrective actions in real-time.

### Cost Optimization

Cloud Custodian also helps organizations optimize cloud costs by automating the deletion of unused resources, enforcing tagging policies to identify unused resources, and providing reports on cost savings.

## The Watchdog: Snyk

[Snyk](https://snyk.io/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} is a cloud security platform that helps you to get end-to-end insight into your security footprint.

<img src="{{ '/img/2023-02-16-secure-cloud-foundation/snyk.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Gandalf, You shall not pass" class="image fit" style="margin:0px auto; max-width:100%; height:60%">

### Code scanning

Snyk can scan your code for vulnerabilities and compliance issues.
It can scan your code for security issues like sql injection or path traversal vulnerabilities.

You might be thinking that nice but how do I figure out how to solve it?

> They have a data flow that shows you the entry point and method invocation of the vulnerability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They have a data flow that shows you the entry point and method invocation of the vulnerability, which shows you the entire stack path to the vulnerability in your source code.
```

Don't start a sentence with 'Which'.

Which shows you the entire stack path to the vulnerability in your source code.
This helps you in assessing what the impact of a vulnerability is and how urgent you need to provide a patch for it.

> (method that is publicly accessible vs library code that isn't used)

Reviewer: Rephrase this one better, use proper grammar or just remove it.

> To help you further even more with solving the vulnerability you can read the details of the vulnerability

Reviewer: use further or even, or a comma inbetween.

and a best practice for preventing it, if available.
If you thought that would be enough they have another tab that shows 3 open source projects that had the vulnerability
and how they fixed it in their code base.

> ### Licence scanning

Reviewer: Not sure how I feel about this. It's technically correct, but the one thats mostly used (and of course, American :) ) is 'license'. 

Rethink it but I don't have a preferable option here. Do as you wish :)

Reviewer: If you decide to change it, change it for the whole article please.

Author: Since the documentation of Trivy uses American English, I'll change it. nice spot.

You can configure Snyk to scan your open source dependencies for licence issues with your dependencies,
which can be useful for example if your company wants to avoid using dependencies with a certain licence,
because they want to commercialize the software in the future.
For example a library that uses patents,
but its software rights don't include that you may use their patents when using their library.
The company might for various reason not allow AGPLv3 libraries for example, because of various reasons.

### Container scanning

Snyk can scan your container images for vulnerabilities it can do this from docker images, Amazon ECR, Docker hub, ...
You can set this up in your Kubernetes cluster, but currently Fargate is not supported.

> If you want to automate the updating of your images you can do this by using container scanning on your git repository,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to automate the updating of your images you can do this by using container scanning on your Git repository.
By using this method, Snyk can automatically create pull requests for you that you can test and then merge if satisfied.
This reduces your effort to stay safe and up to date.
```

> If you want to automate the updating of your images you can do this by using container scanning on your git repository,
> using this method Snyk can automatically create pull requests for you that you can test and then merge if satisfied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to automate the updating of your images you can do this by using container scanning on your Git repository.
By using this method, Snyk can automatically create pull requests for you that you can test and then merge if satisfied.
```

This reduces your effort to stay safe and up to date.

### Infrastructure as code scanning

Snyk can scan your infrastructure as code against the CIS AWS Foundations Benchmark or you can write custom policies.

> To scan you IaC you simply have to add your git repository that contains your IaC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To scan your IaC, you simply have to add your Git repository that contains your IaC
```

and the Snyk platform will start scanning if for you.
You can also use the Snyk CLI to scan your IaC if you want to make it part of your CI/CD pipelines.
By using it this way you can make this a requirement before pull requests are merged that you pass the CLI tool's scan
or even block deployment to environments.

### Custom policies

Snyk allows you to write custom policies in Rego, but only for IaC scanning and platform policies.

OPA is easy to use because applications can easily delegate police validation to OPA if needed.
Snyk IaC leverages OPA to do it's polic scanning according to one of their blogposts.
You get a preset of policies out o the box from Snyk and you can add your own custom policies writen in Rego.

## The Container Detective: Trivy

[Trivy](https://trivy.dev/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} is an open-source cli tool provided by Aqua
Security.

<img src="{{ '/img/2023-02-16-secure-cloud-foundation/Trivy.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Gandalf, You shall not pass" class="image fit" style="margin:0px auto; max-width:100%; height:60%">

### Container scanning

Trivy can scan container images against well known vulnerabilities.

> On the [tool's homepage](https://trivy.dev/), you can enter public available docker hub images to test it out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the [tool's homepage](https://trivy.dev/), you can enter public available Docker Hub images to test it out.
```

Trivy will scan files inside container images and container image metadata.

Trivy scans the files inside container images for:

* Vulnerabilities
* Misconfigurations
* Secrets
* Licenses

The image metadata will be scanned for:

* Misconfigurations
* Secrets

### Dependency scanning

Trivy can scan your dependencies for well known vulnerabilities.
It has a mode that automatically discovers, declarations files for various package managers
This Dependency scanning is very powerful it scans the file system for typical files used to declare dependencies,
like a `pom.xml`, but can also scan into jar and war files.
If you thought that's nice well it can also scan your linux systems package managers installed packages, apt and apk are

> supported of the box for alpine and ubuntu based images.

Reviewer: Try to rephrase this. The grammar is weird, I don't really like the "if you thought that's nice well...", especially without any quotations.

Dependency scanning <-- unnecessary capital letter 'D'

### CI/CD integration

> Because Trivy is a cli tool it can easily be integrates in CI/CD pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Trivy is a CLI tool, it can easily be integrates in new or existing CI/CD pipelines.
```

To integrate it into GitHub you could tell trivy the run should fail (exit code 1 instead of 0) only for HIGH and
Critical issues.

Trivy also maintains a [GitHub action](https://github.com/aquasecurity/trivy-action) to integrate it in GitHub actions.
But the community has created 2 additional GitHub actions.

This action has some examples of how you can integrate this with GitHub Advanced Security.

### AWS integration

> Trivy can be run locally to scan your AWS environment using the AWS cli.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trivy can be run locally to scan your AWS environment using the AWS CLI.
```

The default included check scans against AWS CIS 1.2.0 benchmark.
It shows summarizes a lists of issues, and gives description of how to resolve the issue, it won't automatically fix it.

The benefit compared to AWS security hub is that here you can stop the issue from being created before merge or deploy.
While security hub would tell you after the resource already exists in AWS.

### Secret scanning

Trivy can scan your code for secrets,
because it's not like you have ever had a developer push your precious AWS access key.

> I really wonder why we suddenly have EC2s booting up with the biggest possible instance size and GPU's.

Reviewer: Nice joke, maybe don't make it a full sentence but more between ( )?

> it can scan for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can scan for:
```

* AWS access key
* GCP service account
* GitHub personal access token
* GitLab personal access token
* Slack access token
* etc.

It can do this either on the file system or inside a container image.

### Configuration issues

Trivy can scan your configuration files against known configuration issues it support files like:

* Dockerfiles
* Kubernetes manifests
* Terraform
* CloudFormation
* etc.

### Custom policies

For all the mentioned functionality custom policies can be written in Rego.

> Trivy uses defsec their cloud rules engine for Docker and Kubernetes

Reviewer: Weird sentence, please rephrase.

and tfsec a static analysis scanner for terraform code, both of these rule engines are open-source.
Under the hood they both use OPA.

## The Composer: Fugue

[Fugue](https://www.fugue.co/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} is a cloud security platform that helps you to secure your cloud environment,
it was bought by Snyk some time ago and after this take-over Snyk started working on Snyk Cloud.

<img src="{{ '/img/2023-02-16-secure-cloud-foundation/Fugue.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Gandalf, You shall not pass" class="image fit" style="margin:0px auto; max-width:100%; height:60%">

### Baseline enforcement

> Fugue allows you to take a snapshot of your Cloud environment and use it as baseline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fugue allows you to take a snapshot of your cloud environment and use it as baseline.
```

This prevents anyone from making modifications to your environment that are not compliant with your baseline.

> It can't recreate or delete resources it only enforces by modifying them back to the original state of the snapshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can't recreate or delete resources, it only enforces by modifying them back to the original state of the snapshot.
```

A snapshot captures complete cloud resource configurations, attributes, relationships, and drift.

> As an added bonus snapshots enable deep visualization and reporting capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an added bonus, snapshots enable deep visualization and reporting capabilities.
```
